Q-1. Explain Anita’s residence selection and shopping for fashion apparel online with the help of concept and types of price elasticity of demand.

Ans-1. Price elasticity of demand is a measurement of the change in consumption of a product in relation to a change in its price (It is used to understand how supply and demand for a product changes when its price changes). The given scenario is inelastic.

Inelastic refers to the static quantity of a good or service when its price changes - when the price goes up or down, the consumers’ buying habits stay about the same/unchanged. In the given case study, including Anita, nearly 10 people still showed their inclination to take the rooms on hire, even when an additional ₹3,000 imposed was exceeding what was initially planned for accommodation. Anita was inclined to take the room as it fulfilled all her initially thought of basic requirements along with several other additional facilities that served attractive for the tenants (also in fear that she might lose her final shot at the accommodation if she waited any longer or that the price might increase). This also goes with her purchase of fashion apparel online which was ₹1000 above her initial budget (since the clothes came branded and in a higher quantity than what was expected at a lower price - being online)

Hence, the price of this particular PG accommodation is very inelastic. That is, a reduction in price does not increase the demand much, and an increase in price does not hurt demand either. This can be leveraged by marketing professionals. It could even be said that their purpose is to create inelastic demand for the products/services they market. It can be achieved by identifying a meaningful difference in their products/services from any others that are available.

Q-2. Anita’s first salary undoubtedly changed her brand preferences. How do you categorize the new found demand for preferred brands of shampoo and lipstick? Explain with the help of the concept and types of Income Elasticity.

Ans-2. Income elasticity of demand is an economic measure of how responsive the quantity demand for a good/service is to a change in income. Anita's lifestyle choices such as Hindustan Unilever’s TRESemmé Keratin Smooth shampoo over Ayur Herbal’s ‘Ayur Protein shampoo’ and Revlon lipsticks as against her regular Elle18 lipsticks portrays this concept. She felt - now that she was earning and she could purchase products of superior quality, she should possibly switch to better brands.

This shows that as incomes rise, demand for income elastic goods/services will increase because people will have more money to spend. Income elastic goods include luxuries like airline travel, movies, restaurant meals and automobiles.

Measuring the income elasticity of demand is important for industries and business units as they can then forecast how the demand for their products may change in response to consumer incomes. As luxury goods are more income-elastic, manufacturers of luxury goods can change their marketing and advertising strategies based on the change in consumers’ income. Measuring the income elasticity can also help businesses to predict the sales cycles of their goods and services.

Q-3. While Anita’s travel discomfort with shared-auto rickshaw influenced her to buy Honda Activa, was there cross elasticity of demand at work? How do you characterize the cross elasticity of demand for Honda Activa – as a substitute or as a complementary good?

Ans-3. Cross elasticity of demand measures the responsiveness in the quantity demanded of one good when the price for another good changes. Anita wanted to explore other options in transportation as the shared auto rickshaws (that she was using for her office related travel) were not only uncomfortable due to the crowd but also had bothersome co-passengers. This influenced her to purchase a Honda Activa - after having calculated her expenses of travel via auto rickshaw (She would not only be able to travel to office and come back as per her convenience, she could also undertake other personal travels, she thought).

Complementary goods/services have a negative cross-price elasticity: as the price of one good/service increases, the demand for the second good/service decreases. Substitute goods/services have a positive cross-price elasticity: as the price of one good/service increases, the demand for the other good/service increases. Independent goods/services have a cross-price elasticity of zero: as the price of one good/service increases, the demand for the second good/service is unchanged.

The scenario that we have is not exactly independent as we cannot show that the demand for auto rickshaws (close to public-shared transportation) and private vehicles (Honda Activa in this case) is completely independent and individually isolated. We could say that the goods/services have a complementary cross-price elasticity as if the private vehicles' price increase, the demand for transportation means like auto rickshaws would potentially increase and the vice versa (if the private vehicles were cheap people would prefer them over auto rickshaws or other shared means of transportation).